ginger guy change your life change the
plaque hi Tim Van Orden with the running
raw project I'm out on a big boot run in
the glastonbury wilderness on the
backside of Wildcat mountain right now
looking for lost pond I want to talk to
you today about my new training regimen
different than anything I've done in the
past back at the end of September when I
did the US 50k trail championships my
training was really intense I was doing
between 100 and 120 miles a week in the
mountains on trails which meant three to
four hours a day and when that race was
done my knees were shot my body was shot
my mind was shot I just really didn't
have any interest in running anymore and
that's been a new experience for me over
the past seven years of running raw I've
loved running and I couldn't wait to do
it but from September all the way up
until now in March my interest in
running really hasn't been there so I
decided that if I am going to get myself
back into racing shape I'm going to do
it differently I'm not going to just go
out there and pound the miles and hit
the roads and you know do the leg
strength in the gym I've got to do it in
a way that rien gauges me that rien gets
me excited about training again or
racing or just being fit so the plan is
to do all of my training all of it in my
big boots these guys my big galoshes
which come up just below the knee and I
wear running shoes inside of them and
they buckle up over my running shoes and
they're really heavy and I'm running
through deep snow up and down mountains
so my pace is significantly reduced i'm
running about 15 to 20 minute mile pace
but the effort is extraordinary and one
of the things that's doing is building
up quad and glute strength because the
snow is always slipping out from under
my feet so instead of getting a solid
push
the energy goes down into the smell and
sucks more energy out of the quads and
out of the glutes and because I'm
wearing the big heavy boots in the snow
it causes me to lift my leg higher to
get up above the snow and the weight of
the boot is also building those same
muscles my hip abductors which get me up
and over the snow and pushing me towards
the next step so those muscles are
becoming very very strong and very fit
and studies have shown that the limiting
factor in human speed is not quad and
glute strength it's not to push off it's
the leg lift that's what slows us down
so all of my training right now is
focused on building the strongest hip
abductors I can possibly build by doing
these long grueling slogs through the
snow at a snail's pace my leg turnover
is next to nothing you could walk on
pavement faster than I am hunting in
these boots in the snow and when I first
started doing this back in January I
would go for 20 minutes and that would
be all I could take it was exhausting
and then I do it like two or three times
a week and then when februari came
around I was doing it five days a week
and I got up to 40 minutes and now i'm
almost at the end of March it's the 29th
today and I can do three hours in these
boots and feel okay I'm getting really
really fit and because I'm just
exploring the wilderness and looking at
beautiful places it's inspiring to me to
run through the snow it makes me feel
good for some reason so it keeps me
emotionally and mentally engaged i'm
listening to some great books i'm
checking out new rock formations that
i'm discovering a new trees and ponds
and all kinds of neat stuff animal
tracks moose tracks otter tracks and
that's keeping me engaged in in the
training April twenty-eighth is the US
Masters 10 kilometer road championships
I'm not a road guy I never have been a
road guy so this is going to be my
training for that race I'm not going to
do any intervals I'm not going to do any
speed work i'm not going to do any road
training i'm going to do this and if we
do lose the snow up here if we get a
really big warm spell and the snow goes
away i'm going to come up here with the
boots on
the mud and continue wearing the boots
so I'll keep you posted and let you know
how it progresses and we'll see what
happens in April it may be a disaster at
that race or it may be a big success
don't know but this is this is the new
method the one thing you have to really
watch out for the spruce trees if you
see a little tip of a spruce tree
sticking up there'll be a hole
underneath the branches and you can fall
right through so have to make sure that
I weave around the Spruce because
there's all these spruce traps which can
kill you and really really deep snow and
winter outdoors people know this that if
the snows five or six feet deep stay
away from the spruce trees because you
fall right in and you won't be able to
get out your diana so i'm cruising along
sink in like 8 to 10 inches on every
step and i see a little spruce top
sticking out I just want to test it oh
my god it's a little true you won't be
that bad so I step up to my hip and i'm
not even at the bottom I can feel my
toes wanting to go down further so if
you're out in the woods be very sup to
my jacket be very careful of spruce
trees and now it's pain in the butt to
try to get out yeah I love work for it
I'm gonna try to build up to 15 mile
days in the deep snow and up to my thigh
again spruce tree anyways gonna try to
build up to 12 to 15 miles in my boots
with no impact no pollution running on
the roads don't have to worry about the
cars never get bored there's always
something exciting to look at so if you
live in an environment where there's
snow I can't recommend this enough it's
an insane working out even at the pace
I'm moving out right now which is a
snail's pace my heart rates probably in
the high 150
tosin so I've been out here for about
three hours now I'm starting to get a
little woozy and hungry I want to come
across this rock that looks like a giant
cupcake and it's got a couple dead
evergreens coming out of it that looked
like birthday candles it looks like a
big birthday cupcake I want to eat it